Overview
This project implements a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to classify and detect images into 16 predefined categories. The model is trained on a custom dataset consisting of images and annotations. The instructions below will guide you through setting up the environment, preparing the data, and running the model.

Requirements
Before you begin, ensure you have the following software installed:

* Python 3.7+

* PyTorch (with support for CUDA if using GPU)

* Torchvision

* Matplotlib

* Seaborn

* Pandas

* Scikit-learn

* PIL (Pillow)

* TQDM

You can install the necessary libraries using the following command:

bash
Copy
pip install torch torchvision matplotlib seaborn pandas scikit-learn pillow tqdm
If you're using a GPU, make sure you install the correct version of PyTorch with CUDA support. You can find installation instructions here.
                                                       
                                                             Steps
Step 1: Data Preparation
Dataset Structure
The dataset should consist of:

Image Files: A collection of images in a folder.

CSV File: A CSV file containing the annotations for the images. Each row in the CSV file should contain:

filename: The name of the image file (relative to the image directory).

class: The class label of the image.

Folder Structure
plaintext
Copy
project_directory/
│
├── annotations.csv     # CSV file containing image filenames and class labels
├── Project_Yelloskye/   # Folder containing all the images
│   ├── image1.jpg
│   ├── image2.jpg
│   └── ...
└── model_saves/         # Folder where the model checkpoints will be saved
CSV File Format
Ensure your CSV file (annotations.csv) has the following columns:

filename,class
image1.jpg,Chimney
image2.jpg,Concrete
...
Class Mapping
The model classifies images into 16 categories, which are mapped as follows:

0: Chimney
1: Concrete
2: Construction Worker
3: Earth Mover
4: Electric Generator
5: Excavated Pit
6: Land
7: Power Lines
8: Residential (Bathroom)
9: Residential (Bedroom)
10: Residential (Kitchen)
11: Solar Panel
12: Staircase
13: Tower Crane
14: Tree
15: Water Tank

Step 2: Code Setup

Model Definition: A CNN model is defined using three convolutional layers followed by fully connected layers.

Dataset Class: The CustomDataset class loads and preprocesses images, applying transformations such as resizing and normalization.

Training Loop: The training function trains the model using the dataset and saves the model after each epoch.

File Structure
we should have the following Python script:

train_model.py  # The main script containing the model definition, training loop, etc.
Model Saving
After each epoch, the model will be saved in the model_saves/ directory. These checkpoints named model_epoch_X.pth, where X is the epoch number.

Step 3: Running the Model
Training the Model
* Load the dataset and preprocess the images.

* Initialize the CNN model.

* Train the model for 30 epochs (adjustable).

* Save the model after each epoch in the model_saves/ folder.

Adjusting Hyperparameters
we can modify the following hyperparameters in the train_model.py script:

Learning Rate: Adjust the learning rate for the Adam optimizer.

Batch Size: Set the batch size for training.

Epochs: Modify the number of epochs for training.

Using GPU for Training
If you have access to a GPU, the model will automatically use it for training. Ensure that your system has CUDA installed and that PyTorch is configured to use it.

During training, the following is logged:

Loss: Training loss for the epoch.

Accuracy: Training accuracy for the epoch.

Precision, Recall, F1-Score: Metrics to evaluate model performance.

Confusion Matrix: A confusion matrix will be plotted to visualize classification errors.

Precision-Recall Curves: Curves for each class will be plotted to assess performance across various thresholds.

Step 4: Evaluating the Model
After training, the model can be evaluated on a validation/test set by modifying the script to include an evaluation loop. You can compute additional metrics such as precision, recall, F1-score, and confusion matrices on unseen data.

Loading a Saved Model
To load a trained model and evaluate it, use the following code:

model = CNN(num_classes=16)  # Recreate the model architecture
model.load_state_dict(torch.load('model_saves/model_epoch_X.pth'))  # Load the saved model
model.to(device)  # Move to the correct device (CPU/GPU)
model.eval()  # Set the model to evaluation mode

Step 5: Visualization
Throughout training, various visualizations will be generated, such as:

Confusion Matrix: Visualizes the true vs. predicted labels.

Precision-Recall Curves: Shows the trade-off between precision and recall for each class.

Loss and Accuracy Plots: Shows how the loss and accuracy evolve during training.

These visualizations will help you track the progress of the model and identify areas for improvement.

Future Improvements
To improve the model performance, consider:

Data Augmentation: Implement transformations like rotation, scaling, or flipping to artificially increase the dataset size and improve generalization.

Class Imbalance Handling: Consider using class weighting or oversampling for underrepresented classes to balance training.

Transfer Learning: Use pre-trained models like ResNet or VGG and fine-tune them on this dataset to improve results.

Conclusion
successfully set up a CNN model for image classification. You can now train, evaluate, and analyze the performance of the model using the provided instructions. Feel free to experiment with the hyperparameters, dataset, and model architecture to achieve better performance.

Additional Notes
If you face any issues during training, make sure to check the system configuration, especially if using a GPU.

Ensure that your data is correctly formatted and that the file paths are accurate.